that drives the distressed partner to further paroxysms and convulsions.

It can feel natural to propose that the person who loses their temper in the course of an argument thereby loses any claim to credibility. Whatever point they may be trying to make seems automatically to be invalidated by the fact that they are doing so while in a chaotic state. The only priority seems to be to shift attention to how utterly awful and immature they are being. It is evident: The one who is calm is good; the one who is frothing and spluttering is a cretin.

Unfortunately, both partners end up trapped in an unproductive cycle that benefits neither of them. There’s a moment when the calm one may turn and say, “Since you are mad, there’s no point in talking to you.” The awareness—in the raging lover’s mind—that, as they rant and flail, they are ineluctably throwing away all possibility of being properly attended to or understood feeds their ever-mounting sense of panic: They become yet more demented and exaggerated, further undermining their credibility in the discussion. Hearing their condition diagnosed as insane by the calm one serves to reinforce a suspicion that perhaps they really are mad, which in turn weakens their capacity not to be so. They lose confidence that there might be any reasonable aspect to their distress that could, theoretically, be explained in a clear way if only they could stop crying.

“I’m not going to listen to you any further if you keep making such a fuss,” the calm partner might go on to say, prompting ever more of precisely this “fuss.” The frustrated one is gradually turned into a case study fit only for clinical psychology or a straitjacket. They are, as we might put it, “pathologized”, held up as someone who is actually crazy, rather than as an ordinary human who is essentially quite sane but has temporarily lost their self-possession in an extremely difficult situation.

On the other side of the equation, the person who remains calm is automatically cast, by their own imperturbable nature and subtle skills at public relations, as decent and reasonable. But we should bear in mind that it is at least in theory entirely possible to be cruel, dismissive, stubborn, harsh, and wrong, and keep one’s voice utterly steady. Just as one can, equally well, be red-nosed, whimpering, and incoherent, and have a point.

We need to keep hold of a heroically generous attitude: Rage and histrionics can be the symptoms of a desperation that sets in when a hugely important intimate truth is being blatantly ignored or denied, with the uncontrolled person being neither evil nor monstrous.

Obviously the method of delivery is drastically unhelpful; obviously it would always be better if we didn’t start to cry. But it is not beyond understanding or, hopefully, forgiveness if we were to do so. It’s horrible and frightening to witness someone getting intensely worked up, but with the benefit of perspective, their inner condition calls for deep compassion rather than a lecture. We should remember that only someone who internally felt their life was in danger would end up in such a mess.

We should keep this in mind, because sometimes we will be the ones who fall into a deranged state; we won’t always be the aggrieved, cooler-headed party. We should all have a little movie of ourselves at our very worst moments from which we replay brief highlights and so remember that, while we looked mad, our contortions were only the outer signs of an inner agony at being unable to make ourselves understood on a crucial point by the person we relied on.

We can stay calm with almost everyone in our lives. If we lose our temper with our partners, it is likely because we are so invested in them and our joint futures. We shouldn’t invariably hold it against someone that they behave in a stricken way; it isn’t (probably) a sign that they are mad or horrible. Rather, as we should have the grace to recall, it is just that they love and depend on us very much.





The Absentee Argument


There are so many ways in which the world wounds us. At work, our manager repeatedly humiliates and belittles us. We hear of a party to which we were not invited. A better-looking, wealthier person snubs us at a conference. We develop a skill that turns out not to be much in demand in the world; some people we were with at college set up a hugely successful business.

Our hurt, humiliation, and disappointments accumulate—but almost always, we cannot possibly complain about them to anyone. Our managers would sack us if we told them how we felt. Our acquaintances would be horrified by the depth of our insecurities. No one gives a damn about an admirable company that has hurt our feelings through its success. There is no way to take out our distress on geopolitics or economic history or the existential paradox that we are required to make decisions about our lives before we could possibly know what they will entail. We cannot rave at the cosmos or at the accidents of political power. We need, most of the time, simply to politely swallow our hurt and move on.

But there is one exception to this rule: We can rant and moan at a person who is more reliably kind to us than anyone else, a person whom we love more than any other, a blessed being who is waiting for us at home at the end of every new grueling day …

Unfortunately, we don’t always tell our partner that we are causing problems because we are sad about things that have nothing to do with them; we just create arguments to alleviate our distress. We are mean to them because our boss didn’t care, the economy wasn’t available for a chat, and there was no God to implore. We reroute all the humiliation and rage that no one else had time for on to the shoulders of the one person who most cares about our well-being. We tell them that if only they were more supportive, were less intrusive, made more money, were less materialistic, were more imaginative or less naive, less fussy or more demanding, more dynamic or more relaxed, sexier or less obsessed with sex, more intelligent or less wrapped up in the world of books, more adventurous or more settled, then we could be happy. Our life would be soothed and our errors redeemed. It is, as we imply and occasionally even tell them, all their fault.

This is, of course, horrible and largely untrue. But enfolded within our denunciations and absurd criticisms is a strangely loving homage. Behind our accusations is an inarticulate yet large compliment. We complain unfairly as a tribute to the extent of our love and the position the partner has taken in our lives.

We pick a fight with them over nothing much, but what we are in effect saying is: Save me, redeem me, make sense of my pain, love me even though I have failed. The fact that we are blaming our partner in ridiculous ways is a heavily disguised but authentic mark of the trust we have in them. We must be civilized and grown up with everyone else, but with one person on the planet, we can at points be maddeningly irrational, utterly demanding, and horribly cross, not because they deserve it, but because so much has gone wrong, we are so tired, and they are the one person who promises to understand and forgive us. No wonder we love them.





The Argument of Normality


Being in a relationship, even a very good one, requires us constantly to defend our preferences and points of view against the possibility of a partner’s objections. We can find ourselves having to argue about what time to go to bed, where to put the couch, how often to have sex, what to do in a foreign city, or what the best color for a new car might be. In previous eras, the sorts of justifications we wielded were far simpler. The person with more power would simply assert with haughty indifference: Because I say so … or Because I want it this way … But we live in a more rational age focused on discussion, where only well-founded and articulated reasons are expected to swing a point.

Because we live in a democratic age too, one of the tools to which warring couples most often have resort when attempting to justify their choices is majority opinion. That is, in the heat of a fight, we remind our opponent that what we want to do, think, or feel is normal. We suggest that they should agree with us, not only or primarily because of what we happen to say, but because they’ll find—once they stop to consider the matter with appropriate humility—that all right-thinking people agree with us too. Our position (on travel plans, sexual routines, or car colors) isn’t mere idiosyncrasy; it is synonymous with that lodestar of contemporary ethics, “normality.”

As we fight, we bolster our personal and therefore fragile opinion with the supposed impregnable voice of the entire community: It is not simply that I—one solitary, easily overlooked person—find your attitude very displeasing. All reasonable people—in fact, an electoral majority of the world—are presently with me in condemning your ideas. You are—in your opinion on how to cook pasta, when to call your sister, or the merit of the prize-winning novel—utterly alone.

In a pure sense, what is “normal” shouldn’t matter very much at all. What is widespread in our community is often wrong and what is currently considered odd might actually be quite wise. But however much we know this intellectually, we are profoundly social creatures; millions of years of evolution have shaped our brains so as naturally to give a great deal of weight to the opinions of those around us. In reality, it almost always feels emotionally crucial to try to retain the broad goodwill and acceptance of our community. So the claim to “normality,” however approximately and unfairly it is made, touches on a sensitive spot in our minds – which is precisely why our partner invokes it so deftly.

Nevertheless, we should hold on to the counterarguments. When it comes to personal life, we have no sound idea of what is normal, because we have no easy access to the intimate truths of others. We don’t know what a normal amount of sex really is, or how normal it is to cry, sleep in a different bed, or dislike a partner’s best friend. There are no reliable polls or witnesses.

In addition, and more importantly, we should cease cynically lauding the idea of the normal when it suits us by acknowledging that almost everything that is beautiful and worth appreciating in our relationship is deeply un-normal. It’s very un-normal that someone should find us attractive, should have agreed to go out with us, should put up with our antics, should have come up with such an endearing nickname for us that alludes to our favorite animal from childhood, should have bothered to spend some of their weekend sewing on buttons for us—and should bother to listen to our anxieties late into the night. We are the beneficiaries of some extremely rare eventualities and it is the height of ingratitude to claim to be a friend of the normal when most of what is good in our lives is the result of awesomely minuscule odds. We should stop badgering our partners with phoney democratic arguments and admit to something far truer and possibly more effective in its honest vulnerability: We would love something to happen because, and only because, it would make us very happy if it did—and very upset if it didn’t.





The Parental-Resemblance Argument


There is a move many of us make in the heat of an argument with our partner that is at once devastating, accurate and entirely uncalled for. In a particularly contemptuous, sly, and yet gleeful tone, partners are inclined to announce, as if a rare truth were being unearthed, “You’re turning into your mother” or “You’re turning into your father.”

The claim is apt to silence us because, however much we may have tried to develop our own independent characters, we can’t help but harbor a deep and secret fear that we are prey to an unconscious psychological destiny. In one side of our brains, we are aware of a range of negative qualities we observed in our parents that we sense are intermittently hinted at in our own personalities. And we are terrified.

We catch ourselves rehearsing opinions that once struck us as patently absurd or laughable. At moments of weakness, we find ourselves replaying just the same sarcastic or petty, vain or angry attitudes we once felt sure we would never want to emulate. The accusations of our partner hurt so much because they knock up against a genuine risk.

At the same time, the criticism is deeply underhand. First, because even if we ourselves occasionally share an account of our parents’ failings with our partners, the universal rules of filial loyalty mean that we—and only we—are ever allowed to bring these up again in an aggressive tone.

Second, the accusation is unfair because it is attempting to push us into denying something that is invariably partly correct. How could we not be a little like our parents, given the many years we spent around them, the untold genes we share with them, and the malleability of the infant mind?

We should never get railroaded into protesting that we are unlike those who put us on the earth; we should undercut the implicit charge by immediately candidly admitting that we are, of course, very much like our parents, as they are akin to theirs. How could we be anything else? Why wouldn’t we be? But, in a twist to the normal argument, we should then remind our partners that we chose to be with them precisely in order to attenuate the risks of an unexamined parental destiny. It was and remains their solemn duty not to mock us for being like our parents, but to assist us with kindness to become a little less like them where it counts. By hectoring and accusing us, they aren’t identifying a rare truth from which we hide away in shame; they are stating the obvious and then betraying the fundamental contract of adult love. Their task as our partner isn’t to bully us into making confessions that we would have been ready to accept from the start, but to help us evolve away from the worst sides of people who have inevitably messed us up a little and yet whom we can’ t—of course, despite everything—stop loving inordinately.





The Argument from Excessive Logic


It seems odd at first to imagine that we might get angry, even maddened, by a partner because they are, in the course of a discussion, proving to be too reasonable and too logical. We are used to thinking highly of reason and logic. We are not normally enemies of evidence and rationality. How, then, do these ingredients become problematic in the course of love? But from close up, considered with sufficient imagination, our suspicion can make a lot of sense.

When we are in difficulties, what we may primarily be seeking from our partners is a sense that they understand what we are going through. We are not looking for answers (the problems may be too large for there to be any obvious ones) so much as comfort, reassurance, and fellow feeling. In the circumstances, the deployment of an overly logical stance may come across not as an act of kindness, but as a species of disguised impatience.

Let’s imagine someone who comes to their partner complaining of vertigo. The fear of heights is usually manifestly unreasonable: The balcony obviously isn’t about to collapse; there’s a strong iron balustrade between us and the abyss; the building has been tested by experts. We may know all this intellectually, but it does nothing to reduce our sickening anxiety in practice. If a partner were patiently to begin to explain the laws of physics to us, we wouldn’t be grateful; we would simply feel they had misunderstood us.

Much that troubles us has a structure akin to vertigo: Our worry isn’t exactly reasonable, but we’re unsettled all the same. We can, for example, continue to feel guilty about letting down our parents, no matter how nice to them we’ve actually been. Or we can feel very worried about money, even if we’re objectively economically quite safe. We can feel horrified by our own appearance, even though no one else judges our face or body harshly. Or we can be certain that we’re failures who’ve messed up everything we’ve ever done, even if, in objective terms, we seem to be doing pretty well. We can obsess that we’ve forgotten to pack something, even though we’ve taken a lot of care and can in any case buy almost everything at the other end. Or we may feel that our life will fall apart if we have to make a short speech, even though thousands of people make quite bad speeches every day and their lives continue as normal.

When we recount our worries to our partner, we may receive a set of precisely delivered, unimpassioned logical answers—we have been good to our parents, we have packed enough toothpaste—answers that are entirely true and yet unhelpful as well, and so in their own way enraging. It feels as if the excessive logic of the other has led them to look down on our concerns. Because, reasonably speaking, we shouldn’t have our worries, the implication is that we must be mad for having them.

The one putting forward the “logical” point of view shouldn’t be surprised by the angry response they receive. They are forgetting how weird and beyond the ordinary