.

Throughout the twentieth century, the biggest influence on how people thought about sex came from the work of Sigmund Freud. The psychoanalyst moved sex from a marginal topic of discussion to the center of the cultural conversation. Radically, he insisted that sex might be profoundly connected with almost everything else in our lives. But, problematically and rather unwittingly, he made it sound as if everything else could be degraded or at least made sinister by this connection. One might have thought oneself interested in noble subjects like art or politics, but in truth, Freud seemed from a distance to be suggesting, one was just being rather base in a disguised way. Through a Freudian lens, everything appeared to have been contaminated by a hidden stratum of sexual concern.

Yet, with no disrespect to Freud himself, exactly the reverse might be true. It is not the case that when we look at art or politics we are merely being kinky; rather that when we think we are merely being kinky we are in fact pursuing some very earnest and intelligible goals that are connected with a raft of other, higher aspirations. Our sexual lives are much more in contact with our values than we tend to suppose. What seems incomprehensibly perverse is usually a very logical endeavor to reach a profound and honorable goal by bodily means: We are, via sex, seeking to connect emotionally with, and make ourselves understood by, another person.

Take the practice of jamming our face against someone’s vulva or testicles. Oral sex can be hard to explain. Yet, as in so many sexual acts, a feeling of being accepted is at the heart of the draw. For most of life, we learn to keep our eyes strictly averted from others’ genital areas. We take immense care in changing rooms to deploy towels in strategic ways to ensure that no one will glimpse parts of us that we have learned to refer to, tellingly, as “private.” The thrill of oral sex is connected to a brief, magnificent reversal of all our internalized taboos. We no longer have to feel ashamed or guilty. The act may be physical, but the ecstasy is in essence an emotional relief that our secret and in subjective ways “bad” sides have been witnessed and enthusiastically endorsed by another.

Much the same holds for anal sex. The anus is the most proscribed and dangerous part of the body, surrounded by the strictest taboos and most severe dictates on hygiene. But this restriction only directly feeds into the tenderness of being allowed to explore this part of another person and of oneself in the context of a relationship. We’re not forgetting that the anus is the locus of disgust; we are, within sex, relishing the fact for symbolizing how much we have, with our partner, created a small, fenced-off utopia in which the normal rules do not apply. Anal play would lose much of its capacity to delight if the anus were no more “dirty” than a forehead or a shin; the pleasure is dependent on another human letting us do something avowedly filthy with and for them, and upon the implication that this is something they would never do with a person they cared little about. It is exactly the feeling that something is wrong, perverse, or obscene that makes the mutual agreement to try it so great a mark of trust.

Similar psychological dynamics apply to degradation within sex. Normally—and with immense justification—we take instinctive offense at the slightest signs of condescension. We are furious or depressed if someone calls us a “cunt” or a “fucking bastard” or tells us we’re a “shit” or “worthless.” These are the terms people use when they most want to hurt or upset another person, when they are desperate to show contempt or hatred. So on the face of it, it is shocking and disturbing to think that we (or our partner) might get erotically excited by using just these sorts of abusive terms in bed.

We would be wise to begin studying the issue through the lens of perhaps the greatest novel of the twentieth century, Marcel Proust’s In Search of Lost Time. In the first volume, Swann’s Way, Proust’s unnamed narrator, then a young teenager, is taking a walk near his grandmother’s house in the French countryside. As he passes a building at the edge of the village, he notices, in an upper bedroom, a woman, Mademoiselle Vinteuil, making love to a female friend. He is mesmerized and climbs a little hill for a better view. There he sees something even more surprising unfolding: Mademoiselle Vinteuil has positioned a photograph of her dead father on the bedside table and is encouraging her lesbian lover to spit on the image as they have sex, this gesture proving extremely exciting to them both. Early readers of Proust’s novel were puzzled by and heavily critical of this scene of erotic defilement. What was this revolting episode doing in an otherwise gracious and beautiful love story, filled with tender evocation of riverbanks, trees, and domestic life? Proust’s editor wanted to cut the scene, but the novelist insisted on retaining it, asking the editor to understand its importance within his overarching philosophy of love.

Proust tried hard to make sure his readers would not judge Mademoiselle Vinteuil harshly, going so far as to suggest that even the woman’s father wouldn’t ultimately have minded being spat on by her lover, so long as he understood what was really going on: “I have since reflected that if Monsieur Vinteuil had been able to be present at this scene, he might still, and in spite of everything, have continued to believe in his daughter’s soundness of heart.” Proust’s argument is that defilement during sex isn’t what it seems. Ostensibly, it’s about violence, hatred, meanness, and a lack of respect. But for Proust, it symbolizes a longing to be properly oneself in the presence of another human being, and to be loved and accepted by them for one’s darkest sides rather than just for one’s politeness and good manners. Mademoiselle Vinteuil is, in her day-to-day behavior, an extremely moral and kindly character, and yet this pressure to be always responsible and “good” also begs moments of release.

Sex in which two people can express their defiling urges is, for Proust, at heart an indication of a quest for complete acceptance. We know we can please others with our goodness, but (suggests Proust) what we really want is also to be endorsed for our more peculiar and dark impulses. The discipline involved in growing up into a good person seeks occasional alleviation, which is what sex can provide in those rare moments when two partners trust one another enough to reveal their otherwise strictly censored desires to dirty and insult. Though defiling sex seems on the surface to be about hurting another person, really it’s a quest for intimacy and love—and a delight that, for a time at least, we can be as bad as we like and still turn out to be the object of another’s affection.

Defilement therefore has meaning: It is a surprising way of trying to improve a relationship. It’s not an act of sabotage or a denial of love. It’s a deeply curious but, in its own way, very logical quest for closeness.

We need to embrace a similarly radical understanding of the many aspects of our sexualities that seem very odd at first. We are such complicated and surprising machines; we need to foster the rehabilitation (by which we mean the wise, sympathetic investigation) of parts of ourselves that are otherwise so easy to disown or panic around. Although our erotic enthusiasms may sometimes sound off-putting, they are almost always motivated by a search for the good: a desire to build a connection marked by understanding, sympathy, and kindness.





AFFAIRS


An affair is a love—or sexual—story between two people, one of whom (at least) is ostensibly committed to someone else. Most importantly, in our times, an affair is a disaster, pretty much the greatest betrayal that can befall us, a harbinger of untrammeled suffering, frequently the end of the relationship it has violated and almost always an occasion for fierce moralizing and the division of participants into goodies (who have been betrayed) and monsters (who have betrayed).

However, in trying to understand affairs and make sense of their pains as well as their less frequently confessed attractions, we should grasp that the way we interpret affairs today is very particular to our own times. Judged against the long span of human experience, we are remarkably contorted about the whole business. People have always had affairs, but what an affair means has been subject to huge changes across societies and eras.





When Does an Affair Begin?


Once an affair has been uncovered, we often ask—in the position of the betrayed, pained party—when it began. Pinpointing the precise moment promises to shed light on its motivations and on possible ways to prevent any further such calamities in the future.

There is, understandably, a hunt for the exact time when the two straying individuals met and physical contact began. We think of how two people had a drink after a business dinner or met online or flirted at a party and agreed to meet up a few days later. We concentrate on details: when their knees touched under the table; when one of them lightly put their arm round the other’s waist, and when they first lied about where they were going or to whom they were sending a message.

This kind of detective work feels obvious, but it overlooks a complexity: The start of an affair should not be equated with the moment when two straying people meet. Affairs begin long before there is anyone to have an affair with. Their origins lie with certain initially minute fissures that open up within a subtly fracturing couple. The affair pre-dates, possibly by many years, the arrival of any actual lover.

The situation is duplicated in many other areas: the study of history, for one. It is common to ask when a cataclysmic event such as, for example, the French Revolution began. A traditional response is to point to the summer of 1789, when some of the deputies at the Estates General took an oath to remain in session until a constitution had been agreed on, or a few days later when a group of Parisians attacked and broke into the Bastille prison. But a more sophisticated and instructive approach locates the beginning significantly earlier: with the bad harvests of the previous ten years; with the loss of royal prestige following military defeats in North America in the 1760s, or with the rise of a new philosophy in the middle of the century that stressed the idea of citizens’ rights. At the time, these incidents didn’t seem particularly decisive; they didn’t immediately lead to major social change or reveal their solemn nature. But they slowly and powerfully put the country on course for the upheavals of 1789: They moved the country into a revolution-ready state.

Likewise, affairs begin long before the meeting at the conference or the whispered confidences at the party. It is not key to fixate on the trip to Miami or the login details of the website. The whole notion of who is to blame and for what suddenly starts to look much more complicated and less clear-cut. One should be focusing on certain conversations that didn’t go well in the kitchen three summers ago or the sulk in the taxi home five years before. The drama began long before anything dramatic unfolded.

This is how some of the minute but real causes might be laid out by a partner who eventually strayed.





Unending busy-ness


It was a Sunday morning. My partner had been taken up for months with a big project and I’d been very understanding. Now it was over and I was looking forward to some closeness and a trip to a cafe. But suddenly there was something new that he needed to look at on his phone. I glanced over at his face, which was lit up by the glow of the screen, and his eyes looked cold, determined, and resolutely elsewhere. Or else my partner hatched a sudden firm plan to reorganize the kitchen cupboards just when at last we might have had a quiet time in the park together. That’s perhaps when the afternoon of passion in Bordeaux really began: with the need to stop everything in order to swap around the crockery and the glasses.





Neglect


I was away on an exhausting trip and in a break between meetings I fought for the chance to call my partner. She picked up, but the television continued on in the background. She had even forgotten that I’d had to give a speech and it felt a little humiliating to have to remind her and to hear her lackluster “great” in response.





Shaming


We were with some new friends, people we didn’t know too well and wanted to create a good impression on. My partner was looking to amuse them and, having cast around for options, started to tell everyone a story about how I once showed the wrong slides in a presentation at work. He knows how to tell a good story and there was a lot of laughter.





Ownership


Without discussing it, my partner arranged that we’d both go and have lunch with her parents. It wasn’t so much that I minded going; it was the fact that she didn’t feel the need to ask if I minded and if the timing was convenient. On another occasion, without even mentioning it, she bought a new kettle and got rid of the old one. It was as if I had no say at all. Sometimes she’d just tell me what to do—“Take the trash out,” “Pick up some mineral water at the store,” “Put on different shoes”—without adding “please” or “would you mind” or “it would be lovely if …” Just a few words would have made all the difference.





Flirting


I was at a party with my partner and I saw him across the room, bending toward this person, saying something. He was laughing, being charming. He put his hand on the back of her chair. Later he said it had been a very boring conversation.





One too many arguments


It wasn’t the basic fact of having disagreements; it was the sheer number of them, and their unending, repetitive nature. One that sticks in the memory was when we were at the seaside and things should have been happy for once. Yet my partner chose again to ramp up the tension about a Thai takeaway that had been ordered. I remember arguing and, at the same time, one part of my mind was disassociating, looking down upon the two of us standing on the pier with cross faces and wondering, “Why?”





Lack of tenderness


We were walking along the street together near the antiques market and I reached out to hold my partner’s hand, but he failed to notice. Another time he was doing something at the kitchen table and I put an arm round his shoulder, but he said sharply, “Not now.” In bed I’m always the one to turn toward him and kiss him goodnight. He responds but never, ever initiates. This rankles more than it seems normal or possible to say.





Erotic disengagement


There was a sexual idea I’d been getting interested in but I felt awkward about mentioning it to my partner. I tried to give a few hints, but she didn’t give the impression she was curious. She didn’t encourage me to expand. Instead she gave me the impression that it would be a lot more convenient if I just kept whatever it was that tickled me to myself.

Individually, none of these things may be very dramatic. Some little version of one or other of them may be happening pretty much every day. And it’s not all one way: Both parties are probably doing some of these things quite regularly, without particularly noticing or meaning to.

Yet a careful historian of infidelity might pinpoint any one of them as the moment at which—in a true sense—an affair began. Long before the party or the conference, the feeling was implanted deep in someone’s mind (perhaps beyond the range of their conscious awareness) that there was something important missing in their relationship that another person might, possibly, be able to supply.

It is common, when an affair is discovered, to become an inquisitorial prosecutor: to seize the phone and ask the “cheat” in detail where they have been; to read through their emails; to parse every receipt. But such assiduousness is a little late, a bit misdirected, and rather too self-serving. We should look further back than the moment when a lover came on the scene. The revolution didn’t begin with the sexual act or the dirty texts and with the actual storming of our domestic citadel; it began on an innocent sunny afternoon many years before, when there was still a lot of goodwill, when a hand was proffered and when the partner was perhaps fatefully careless about how they received it. That might be a rather more painful account of our relationship and its troubles than either of us is ready to contemplate for now, but it might also be a more accurate and ultimately more useful one.





How to Spot a Couple Who Might be Headed for an Affair


Having arguments does not, in itself, say very much about the likelihood of a relationship disintegrating. What matters is how arguments are interpreted, conducted, and resolved. The fragile unions aren’t necessarily the ones in which people shout, insist that this is finally it, call the other a ninny and slam the door; they are the ones in which emotional disconnection and rupture are not cor