rectly identified, examined, and repaired.

A number of qualities are required to ensure that a couple know how to argue well. There is, first and foremost, the need for each party to be able to pinpoint sources of discomfort in themselves early and accurately: to know how to recognize what they are unhappy about and what they need in order to flourish in the couple. This is not necessarily as obvious as one might imagine. It can take time and psychological insight to know that it was actually the missing phone call or the request to move the date of the holiday that is really the source of anger.

Then there is the equally vital quality of feeling that one has the right to speak, that one isn’t duty bound to be “good” and not cause trouble, that it is acceptable to say when one is miserable and troubled by something—however small it might appear; that it is better to spoil a few evenings than ruin a marriage.

It can help to have a sanguine assessment of how human relationships tend to go: to accept that a bit of disappointment and some friction belong to the necessary ingredients of good enough love; that it isn’t a disaster to be cross at points and seemingly convinced that this should be the end.

A subsidiary talent is knowing how to speak up. It might not be exactly the moment the problem appears; diplomatic skills matter. One might need to wait until some of the surface tension has dissipated; perhaps the next morning can do just as well. One needs a background confidence not to have to blurt out every objection in a panicked diatribe or shout a wounded feeling across the room when the other is themselves too upset to hear it. One needs to know how to formulate one’s complaints into a convincing, perhaps even humorously framed point that has a chance of winning over its target.

It matters in all this that one both feels attached to the partner and at the same time has an active impression that one could walk away from them were matters ever truly to escalate. Feeling that one has options, does not therefore have to cling, and deserves good treatment ensures that one’s voice can be measured and that the status quo will remain manageable.

These factors tend to be absent in those unfortunate couples who not only argue but lack the gift of arguing well. The following range of inner obstacles prevents them from dealing effectively with their emotional disconnection and anger.





Over-optimism about relationships


Fragile couples, paradoxically, tend to be very hopeful about love. They associate happiness with conflict-free unions. They do not expect, once they have found the person they unwisely see as The One, ever to need to squabble, storm out of a room, or feel unhappy for the afternoon. When trouble emerges, as it inevitably does, they do not greet it as a sign that love is progressing as it should but as alarming evidence that their relationship may be illegitimate and fundamentally flawed. Their hopes drain them of the energy needed for the patient tasks of diplomatic negotiation and routine maintenance.





Being out of touch with pain


Fragile couples tend not to be good detectives with regard to their own sufferings. They may be both unhappy and yet unsure as to the actual causes of their dissatisfactions. They know something is wrong in their union, but they can’t easily trace the catalyst. They can’t zero in on how it was the lack of trust in them around money that rankles or how it was their behavior toward a demanding youngest child that is hurting. They lash out in vague or inaccurate directions, their attacks either unfairly general or unconvincingly specific.





Shame


A shamed person has fundamental doubts about their right to exist: Somewhere in the past, they have been imbued with the impression that they do not matter very much, that their feelings should be ignored, that their happiness is not a priority, that their words do not count. Once they are part of a couple, shamed people hurt like anyone else, but their capacity to turn their hurt into something another person can understand and be touched by is recklessly weak. Shamed people will sulk rather than speak, hide rather than divulge, feel secretly wretched rather than candidly complain. It is frequently very late, far too late, by the time shamed people finally let their lover know more about the nature of their desperation.





Excessive anxiety


Complaining well requires an impression that not everything depends on the complaint being heard perfectly. Were the lesson to go wrong, were the other to prove intransigent, one could survive and take one’s love elsewhere. Not everything is at stake in an argument. The other hasn’t ruined one’s life. One therefore doesn’t need to scream, hector, insist, or nag. One can deliver a complaint with some of the nonchalance of a calm teacher who wants listeners to learn but can bear it if they don’t because the information can always be conveyed tomorrow, or the next day.





Excessive pride


It takes an inner dignity not to mind too much about having to level complaints around things that could sound laughably “small” or that leave one open to being described as petty or needy. With too much pride and fear, it can become unbearable to admit that one has been upset since lunch because someone didn’t take one’s hand on a walk or wishes so much that they would be readier for a hug last thing at night. One has to feel quite grown up inside not to be offended by one’s own more childlike appetites for reassurance and comfort. It is an achievement to know how to be strong about one’s vulnerability. One may have said, rather too many times, from behind a slammed door, in a defensive tone, “No, nothing is wrong whatsoever. Go away”, when secretly longing to be comforted and understood like a weepy, upset child.





Hopelessness about dialog


Fragile couples often come together with few positive childhood memories of conversations working out: Early role models may simply have screamed and then despaired of one another. They may never have witnessed disagreements eventually morphing into mutual understanding and sympathy. They would deeply love to be understood, but they can bring precious few resources to the task of making themselves so.

None of these factors means there will automatically be an affair, but they are generators of emotional disconnection that contributes to an all-important affair-ready state. Outwardly, things can seem good. A couple may have an interesting social life, some lovely children, a new apartment. But a more judicious analysis will reveal an unexpected degree of risk. An affair won’t in these circumstances—however it may look later—be just an idle self-indulgence or a momentary lack of self-control. It will be the result of identifiable long-term resentments that a couple, otherwise blessed and committed, lacked the inner resources and courage to investigate.





The Role of Sex in Affairs


When an affair is discovered, it is common to describe the person who strayed as despicably sexually profligate. They are lustful, wanton, doglike. They have ceded control to their animal selves. But we get a more nuanced view of the role of sex in affairs by asking a deliberately obtuse, philosophical-sounding question: Why is sex so nice?

One possible answer, which can sound a little odd, is: because we have advanced tendencies to hate ourselves and find ourselves unacceptable. And sex with a new person has an exceptional capacity to reduce feeling like that.

A long-term relationship can all too easily enforce a sense that we are neither very admirable nor worthy. Management of family life, of cleaning rotas, of finances, and of relations with friends and in-laws can contribute to an impression that one is fundamentally troublesome and undeserving of sustained notice. The mood around us is fractious and ungrateful. “Not you again” may be the implicit message one receives upon entering any room.

Physically, we have strict instructions to keep ourselves to ourselves. There is one person on the planet we are meant to be naked in front of and this figure is unlikely to be particularly impressed by or even vaguely cognizant of our appearance. With everyone else, we are a cautious, swaddled being. We would not dare to come more than thirty centimeters near to most of humanity.

And then, suddenly, in the context of an affair, everything changes. We can be unlaced and carefree. Our tongue, normally carefully shielded and used to form vowel sounds and break down toast or the morning cereal, is given permission to enter another person’s mouth. We are no longer just the one who makes problems around the in-laws and doesn’t pull their weight around the house or the finances; instead we are someone whose very essence has, via the flesh, been witnessed and endorsed.

What we may be doing is slipping off another’s top or inviting them to release our trousers, but what all this means is that another human has—exceptionally—chosen to find us worthy.

For so-called cheats (who will most likely have to pay a very heavy price indeed for going to bed with another person), sex can have remarkably little to do with “sex”. It is an activity continuous with a range of non-physical needs for tenderness, acceptance, care and companionship. It is an attempt, negotiated through the body but focused on the satisfactions of the psyche, to make up for a longstanding painfully severed emotional connection with a primary partner.

The crucial, active element in an affair isn’t really the physical sex per se: it’s the sense of closeness, the warmth, the shared liking for which physical sex provides the occasion.

The thought opens us up to a more defined, perhaps more searing and yet usefully more accurate avenue of pain in relation to our partner. The problem is not that they have been horny, something for which we cannot really be held responsible and that we can therefore safely moralize about. It is that they have been lonely—something that it is a great deal harder to bear and think ourselves wholly innocent about.





How to Reduce the Risk of Affairs


The traditional way to try to reduce the chances of someone having an affair is to focus on controlling their actions and outward movements: not letting them go to social events without us, calling them at random times, or reducing their access to social media.

But people don’t have affairs because they are able to meet attractive others; they have affairs because they feel emotionally disconnected from their partners. The best way to stop their being tempted to sleep with someone else is not, therefore, to reduce their opportunities for contact; it is to leave them free to wander the world while ensuring that they feel heard by and are reconciled with their partners. It is emotional closeness, not curfews, that guarantees the integrity of couples.

At a practical level, the route to closeness requires us to ensure that the two main sources of distance, resentment and loneliness, are correctly identified and regularly purged. The more we can tell our partners what we are annoyed and disappointed about, what we long for and are made anxious by, and the more we can feel heard for doing so, the less we will bear grudges, keep our distance, and seek revenge by stripping naked with someone else. Few things are more properly romantic (in the true sense of the word, meaning conducive to love) than highly honest conversations in which we have an opportunity to lay bare the particular ways in which our partners have disappointed us. Nothing may so endear us to someone as a chance to tell them why they have let us down.

To guide us in our restorative complaints, we might consider the following range of prompts.





I sometimes feel frustrated with you when …


It sounds like a nasty theme but, when handled correctly, it is the gateway to great tenderness and closeness. It provides us with an opportunity to do something very rare: level criticism without anger. And it’s a chance to hear criticism as more than an attack, to interpret it for what it may truly be: a desire to learn how to live together with less occasion for anger.





I’d love you to realize that you hurt me when …


We’re carrying around wounds that we have found, understandably and inevitably, hard to articulate. Perhaps the complaints sounded too petty or humiliating to mention at the time. The problem is that when they fester, the currents of affection start to get blocked and soon we may find that we flinch when our partner tries to touch us. This prompt provides a safe moment in which to reveal a set of—typically entirely unintentional—hurts. Maybe last week there was something around work, or their mother, or the way they responded to a fairly innocent enquiry in the kitchen before a run. It’s vital that our partner doesn’t step in and deny that the hurt took place. There is no such thing as a hurt that is too small to matter when emotional closeness is at stake.





One of the hardest things for you to understand about me is …


We end up lonely because there is something important about who we are that our partner appears not to grasp or, so we can conclude, does not even want to take on board. But this lack of interest is rarely malevolent; it is usually more the case that there hasn’t been a proper occasion for exploration. The feeling that one person knows another is the constant enemy of long-term couples. Our partners may understand us well, but we still need patiently and diplomatically to keep explaining things that remain unclear between us. We are changing all the time, we’re no longer who we were last month, and we can struggle to explain our own evolutions and needs even to ourselves. We must never be furious with our beloveds for not grasping facets of our identity we haven’t yet properly managed to share with them.





What I’d love you to appreciate about me is …


We don’t want untrammeled praise, merely the odd moment when we can tell our partner what we feel is worthy of appreciation, maybe a little more appreciation than we have until now spontaneously received. We might want to draw attention to our best intentions (even when they didn’t entirely work out); to the sweeter aspects of our character; or to the good things about us that have quietly removed conflicts that would otherwise have emerged in the background. We’re reminding both of us that there are reasons why we deserve love.





Where I’m unfulfilled in my life …


It need not always be the fault of a lover that we are dissatisfied and restless. The longing for an affair can arise from a sense that the world more generally has not heard us, that we have been abandoned with career anxieties, or lag behind our peers in terms of achievement and assets. Day to day, we tend not to explain the origins of these distressed moods very well. Our partner is the witness to them but can’t easily recognize where the unhappiness is coming from. So they make the next most obvious move and start to assume that we are simply mean or bad-tempered. This is a chance to explain the background existential fear and professional ennui responsible for some of our most acute everyday irritations and withdrawn states; a chance to demonstrate that we are not bad, merely longing for their reassurance and support to battle our impression of insignificance and failure.

We also need, in order to be close and resist the lure of an affair, to be able to speak with unusual candor about our sexual aspirations. Nothing more quickly reduces the need to act out a fantasy than the ability to speak about it—and be heard with sympathy, tolerance, and curiosity. Here are some of the prompts that might induce the right sort of conversation about sex:

Something I’m really inhibited about sexually is …

I would love it if you could understand that sometimes I want …

What I wish I could change about me and sex is …

What I wish I could change about you and sex is …



None of these prompts can guarantee that an affair will never happen, but they could at least help to diagnose and repair the feelings of resentful distance or erotic loneliness that are the hidden drivers of the desire to wander off with someone else. We should dare to spend less time banning our partners from having lunch with strangers or traveling alone, and more time ensuring that they feel understood for their flaws and confusions, and appreciated for their virtues.





Affairs and High Horses


Whatever its benefits and pains, being involved in an affair should, if nothing else, cure us once and for all of any tendency to moralize—that is, to look harshly and with strict judgment on the misdemeanors and follies of others.

An affair should naturally induct us into the full scale of our mendacity, impatience, weakness, cowardliness, derangement, and sentimentality. We should thereafter never be able to feel impervious and superior when hearing of certain insane things that others have done in the name of love or desire. We will have joined the legions of the sexually chastened, who can have no more illusions as to their own purity or steadiness of mind.

And yet we won’t be able to give up on ourselves entirely either; we’ll ha