pe can be honored.

We need to replace the Romantic template with a psychologically mature vision of love we might call Classical, which encourages in us a range of unfamiliar but hopefully effective attitudes:

■ that it is normal that love and sex do not always belong together;

■ that discussing money early on, up front, in a serious way is not a betrayal of love;

■ that realizing that we are rather flawed, and our partner is too, is of huge benefit to a couple in increasing the amount of tolerance and generosity in circulation;

■ that we will never find everything in another person, nor they in us, not because of some unique incapacity, but because of the basic operations of human nature;

■ that we need to make immense and often rather artificial-sounding efforts to understand one another because intuition will never be enough;

■ that practicalities matter—so, for example, there is special dignity around the topics of laundry and domestic management.



Such attitudes and many more belong to the new, more hopeful future of love.





CHOOSING A PARTNER


Our modern understanding of love is built on the principle of freedom of choice. We have been unshackled from extraneous inhibiting forces—economic, familial, religious—in order to enjoy the freedom to form relationships with exactly whom we like.

But we have, along the way, made a painful discovery: that the greatest inhibitor of our freedom to choose partners as we would wish comes from within. It turns out that we are never exactly free to love in accordance with wisdom or our aspirations for happiness.

The originators of the idea of free choice in love certainly imagined that their bold suggestion would bring to an end the sort of unhappy relationships previously brokered by parents and society. But our obedience to our instincts has, very often, proved to be its own disaster. Respecting the special feelings we get around certain people in nightclubs and at train stations, at parties and on websites appears not to have made us any happier in our unions than a medieval couple shackled in marriage by two royal courts keen to preserve the sovereignty of a slice of ancestral land. “Instinct” has been little better than “calculation” in underwriting the quality of our love stories.

This is because we don’t fall in love first and foremost with those who care for us best and most devotedly; we fall in love with those who care for us in ways that we expect. Adult love emerges from a template of how we should be loved that was created in childhood and is likely to be connected to a range of problematic compulsions that militate in key ways against our chances of growth.

Far more than happiness, what motivates us in relationships is a search for familiarity—and what is familiar is not restricted to comfort, reassurance, and tenderness; it may include feelings of abandonment, humiliation, and neglect, which can form part of the list of paradoxical ingredients we need to refind in adult love. We might reject healthy, calm, and nurturing candidates simply on the basis that they feel too right, too eerie in their unfamiliar kindness, and nowhere near as satisfying as a bully or an ingrate, who will torture us in just the way we need in order to feel we are in love.

To get at the peculiar instincts that circulate powerfully in the less noticed corners of our brains, we might try to finish stub sentences that invite us to share what might charm or repel us in others:

If someone shows me huge kindness and consideration, I …

If someone isn’t entirely convinced by me, I …

When someone tells me they really need me, I …



Our honest reactions are legacies that reveal our underlying assumptions about the kind of love it feels we are allowed, and are perhaps not an especially good guide to personal or mutual happiness.

It is common to advise people who are drawn to tricky candidates simply to leave them for more wholesome options. This is theoretically appealing, yet often practically impossible. We cannot magically redirect the wellsprings of attraction. Rather than aim for a transformation in the types of people we are drawn to, it may be wiser to try to adjust how we respond and behave around the difficult characters whom our past mandates that we will find interesting.

Our problems are often generated because we continue to respond to compelling people in the way we learned to behave as children around their templates. For instance, maybe we had a rather irate parent who often raised their voice. We loved them, but reacted by feeling that when they were angry we must be guilty. We got timid and humble. Now if a partner (to whom we are magnetically drawn) gets cross, we respond as squashed, browbeaten children: We sulk, we assume it’s our fault, we feel got at and yet deserving of criticism.

But rather than seek radically to re-engineer our instincts, we can try to learn to react to our lovers not as we did as children but in the more mature and constructive manner of a rational adult. There is an enormous opportunity to move ourselves from childlike to more adult patterns of response in relation to the difficulties we are attracted to.

Many of us are highly likely to end up with somebody with a particularly knotty set of issues that trigger our desires as well as our childlike defensive responses. The answer isn’t usually to shut down the relationship, but to strive to deal with the compelling challenges it throws up with some of the wisdom we weren’t capable of when we first encountered these in a parent or caregiver.

It probably isn’t in our remit to locate a wholly grown-up person to love; but it is always in our remit to behave in more grown-up ways around a partner’s less mature sides.





A: Partner’s tricky behaviour

B: Childlike response on our part

C: More adult response we should aim for



Raising voice

‘It’s all my fault …’

‘This is their issue. I don’t have to feel bad.’



Patronizing

‘I’m stupid.’

‘There are lots of kinds of intelligence. Mine is fine.’



Morose

‘I have to fix you.’

‘I’ll do my best, but I’m not ultimately responsible for your mindset – and this doesn’t have to impact on my self-esteem …’



Overbearing

‘I deserve this.’

‘I’m not intimidated by you.’



Distracted, preoccupied

Attention-seeking: ‘Notice me.’

‘You’re busy, I’m busy, that’s OK …’





THAT WE ARE A HELLISH PROPOSITION


The idea that one is in many ways an extremely difficult person to live around sounds, at first, improbable and even offensive. Yet fully understanding and readily and graciously admitting this possibility may be the surest way of making certain that one proves a somewhat endurable proposition. There are few people more deeply insufferable than those who don’t, at regular intervals, suspect they might be so.

We are, all of us, hellish. We don’t need to be thinking of anyone in particular to know this is true for everyone. We have all, in one way or another, been inadequately parented, have a panoply of unfortunate psychological traits, are beset by bad habits, are anxious, jealous, ill-tempered, and vain. We are necessarily going to bring an awesome amount of trouble into someone else’s life.

We tend to be shielded from this unwelcome news through a mixture of sentimentality and neglect. Our parents may have loved us too much to outline the drawbacks; our friends may not have had the will. And our exes are liable to have been too keen to escape to bother with our re-education.

Furthermore, it is impossible, on one’s own, to notice the extent of one’s power to madden. Our eccentric hours and reliance on work to ward off feelings of vulnerability can pass without comment when we fall singly into bed past one in the morning. Our peculiar eating habits lack reality without another pair of eyes to register our dismaying combinations.

Eventually, a partner will call us out. It will feel like a horrible personal attack that a nicer person would not have put us through. But it is merely an inevitable response to failings anyone exposed to us would have eventually needed to bring up. We would all do well to have a detailed response to the suggestion, best raised early on, that we might be a trial to be with.

Everyone, seen close up, has an appalling amount wrong with them. The specifics vary hugely, but the essential point is shared. It isn’t that a partner is too critical or unusually demanding. They are simply the bearer of inevitably awkward news. Asking anyone to be with us is in the end a peculiar request to make of someone we claim to care intensely about.





THE HELLISHNESS OF OTHERS


In an analogous move, to evolve a clear-eyed and unpanicked view of the grave failings of one’s partner is among the most generous actions we are capable of in love. This is because the success or failure of a relationship doesn’t hinge on whether the other is deeply flawed—they are. What matters is how we interpret their failings; how we understand the reasons why they have previously been and will again in the future be very difficult to be with.

The crux is whether we can move from interpreting behavior as a sign of meanness to viewing it as a symptom of pain and anxiety. We will have learned to love when our default response to unfortunate moments is not to feel aggrieved but to wonder what damaged aspects of a partner’s rocky past have been engaged.

Annoying characteristics almost always have their roots in childhood, long before our arrival. They are, for the most part, strategies that were developed for coping with stresses that could not correctly be processed by an immature mind. An overcritical, demanding parent might have made them feel as if being disorganized and untidy was a necessary rebellion, a crucial assertion of independence against a threatening demand for compliance. A watchfulness around social status might have been the outcome of a succession of bankruptcies in a father’s business during adolescence. An avoidant personality might have resulted from an early unbearable disappointment.

We are ready for relationships not when we have encountered perfection, but when we have grown willing to give flaws the charitable interpretations they deserve.

Our partners aren’t uniquely damaged. We just know them a lot better than the exciting stranger. Our partner suffers from the disadvantages of incumbency: of having been in our lives for so long that we have had the opportunity to be patiently introduced to the full range of their inadequacies. Our certainty that we might be happier with another person is founded on ignorance, the result of having been shielded from the worst and crazier dimensions of a new character’s personality—which we must accept are sure to be there, not because we know them in any detail, but because we know the human race.

A charitable mindset doesn’t make it lovely to be confronted by the other’s troubles. But it strengthens our capacity to stick with them, because we see that their failings don’t make them unworthy of love, rather all the more urgently in need of it.





THE LONGING FOR REASSURANCE


There are sweet moments, early on in relationships, when one person can’t quite work up the courage to let another know just how much they like them. They’d love to touch the other’s hand and find a place in their life; but their fear of rejection is so intense they hesitate and falter. Our culture has a lot of sympathy for this awkward and intensely vulnerable stage of love. We’re taught to be patient about the way people might grow somewhat flustered or tongue-tied. Or they might act sarcastically or coldly, not from indifference, but as a way of disguising a disturbingly powerful enthusiasm. However, the assumption is that the terror of rejection will be limited in scope and focused on one particular stage of a relationship: its beginning. Once a partner is finally accepted and the union gets under way, the assumption is that the fear must come to an end.

But one of the odder features of relationships is that, in truth, the fear of rejection never ends. It continues, even in quite sane people, on a daily basis, with frequently difficult consequences—chiefly because we refuse to pay it sufficient attention and aren’t trained to spot its counter-intuitive symptoms in others. We haven’t found a winning way to keep admitting just how much reassurance we need.

Acceptance is never a given; reciprocity is never assured. There can always be new threats, real or perceived, to love’s integrity. The trigger to insecurity can be apparently minuscule. Perhaps the other has been away at work for unusual amounts of time; or they were pretty animated talking to a stranger at a party; or it’s been a while since sex took place. Perhaps they weren’t very warm to us when we walked into the kitchen. Or they’ve been rather silent for the last half an hour.

Instead of requesting reassurance endearingly and laying out our longing with charm, we have tendencies to mask our needs beneath some tricky behaviors guaranteed to frustrate our ultimate aims. Within established relationships, when the fear of rejection is denied, two major symptoms tend to show up.

First, we may become distant—or what psychotherapists call “avoidant.” We want to get close to our partners but feel so anxious that we may be unwanted, we freeze them out: We say we’re busy; pretend our thoughts are elsewhere. We could get involved with a third person, the ultimate defensive attempt to be distant—and often a perverse attempt to assert that we don’t require a love we feel too vulnerable to ask for.

We grow into avoidant patterns when, in childhood, attempts at closeness ended in degrees of rejection, humiliation, uncertainty, or shame that we were ill-equipped to deal with. We became, without consciously realizing it, determined that such levels of exposure would never happen again. At an early sign of being disappointed, we therefore now understand the need to close ourselves off from pain. We are too scarred to know how to stay around and mention that we are hurt.

Or else we become controlling—or what psychotherapists calls “anxious.” We grow suspicious, frantic, and easily furious in the face of the ambiguous moments of love; catastrophe never feels too far away. A slightly distant mood must, we feel, be a harbinger of rejection; a somewhat non-reassuring moment is an almost certain prelude to the end. Our concern is touching, but our way of expressing it often less so, for it emerges indirectly as an attack rather than a plea. In the face of the other’s swiftly assumed unreliability, we complain administratively and try to control procedurally. We demand that they be back by a certain hour; we berate them for looking away from us for a moment; we force them to show us their commitment by putting them through an obstacle course of administrative chores. We get very angry rather than admit, with serenity, that we’re worried. We ward off our vulnerability by denigrating the person who eludes us. We pick up on their weaknesses and complain about their shortcomings. Anything rather than ask the question that so much disturbs us: Do you still care? And yet, if this harsh, graceless behavior could be truly understood for what it is, it would be revealed not as rejection or indifference, but as a strangely distorted, yet very real, plea for tenderness.

A central solution to these patterns is to normalize a new and more accurate picture of emotional functioning: to make it clear just how predictable it is to be in need of reassurance, and at the same time, how understandable it is to be reluctant to reveal one’s dependence. We should create room for regular moments, perhaps as often as every few hours, when we can feel unembarrassed and legitimate about asking for confirmation. “I really need you. Do you still want me?” should be the most normal of enquiries. We should uncouple the admission of need from any associations with the unfortunate and punitive term “neediness.” We must get better at seeing the love and longing that lurk behind some of our and our partner’s most cold, stern, or managerial moments.





PARTNER-AS-CHILD


Small children sometimes behave in stunningly unfair and shocking ways: They scream at the person who is looking after them, angrily push away a bowl of animal pasta, immediately discard something you have just fetched for them. But we rarely feel personally agitated or wounded by their behavior. And the reason is that we don’t readily assign negative motives or mean intentions to very small people. We reach around for the most benevolent interpretations. We don’t think they are doing it in order to upset us. We probably think that they are getting a bit tired, or their gums are sore, or they are upset by the arrival of a younger sibling. We’ve got a large repertoire of alternative explanations that defend us from panic or agitation.

This is the reverse of what tends to happen around adults in general and our lovers in particular. Here we imagine that others have deliberately got us in their sights. If the partner is late for our mother’s birthday because of “work,” we may assume it’s an excuse. If the