y promised to buy us some extra toothpaste but then “forgot,” we’ll imagine a deliberate slight. They probably relish the thought of causing us a little distress.

But if we employed the infant model of interpretation, our first assumption would be quite different: Maybe they didn’t sleep well last night and are too exhausted to think straight; maybe they’ve got a sore knee; maybe they are doing the equivalent of testing the boundaries of parental tolerance. Seen from such a point of view, the lover’s adult behavior doesn’t magically become nice or acceptable. But the level of agitation is kept safely low. It’s very touching that we live in a world where we have learned to be so kind to children; it would be even nicer if we learned to be a little more generous toward the childlike parts of one another.

It sounds strange at first—and even condescending or despairing—to keep in mind that in crucial ways one’s partner always remains a child. On the outside they’re obviously a functioning adult. But the partner-as-child theory urges us to recognize that parts of the psyche always remain tethered to how they were at the early stages of life. This way of seeing the person one is with may be a helpful strategy for managing times when they are very difficult to cope with: when there are outbursts of deeply unreasonable petulance, sulkiness, or flashes of aggression. When they fall far short of what we ideally expect from grown-up behavior and we dismissively label such attitudes as “childish,” we are, without quite realizing it, approaching a hugely constructive idea, but then (understandably though unfortunately) seeing it as simply an accusation, rather than what it truly is: recognition of an ordinary feature of the human condition.

The therapeutic benefit is the observation that we are generally very good at loving children. Our ability to continue to keep calm around children is founded on the fact that we take it for granted that they are not able to explain what is really bothering them. We deduce the real cause of their sorrow from amid the external symptoms of rage, because we grasp that little children have very limited abilities to diagnose and communicate their own problems.

A central premise of the partner-as-child theory is that it’s not an aberration or unique failing of one’s partner that they retain a childish dimension. It’s a normal, inevitable feature of all adult existence. You are not desperately unlucky to have hitched yourself to someone who is still infantile in many ways. Adulthood simply isn’t a complete state; what we call childhood lasts (in a submerged but significant way) all our lives. Therefore some of the responses we reflexively offer to children must forever continue to be relevant when we’re dealing with another grown-up.

Being benevolent to one’s partner’s inner child doesn’t mean infantilizing them. This is no call to draw up a chart detailing when they are allowed screen time or to award stars for getting dressed on their own. It means being charitable in translating things they say in terms of their deeper meaning: “You’re a bastard” might actually be a way of trying to say, “I feel under siege at work and I’m trying to tell myself I’m stronger and more independent than I really feel”; or “You just don’t get it, do you?” might mean, “I’m terrified and frustrated and I don’t really know why. Please be strong.”

Of course, it’s much harder being grown up around another adult whose inner child is on display than it is being with an actual child. That’s because we can see how little and undeveloped a toddler or a five-year-old is, so sympathy comes naturally. We know, and are visually reminded, that it would be a disaster to suddenly turn on the child and try to hold them fully responsible for every moment of their conduct. Psychology has been warning us for half a century or more that this isn’t the right route.

However, we don’t yet have this cultural backup fully in force to assist us in coping with a partner’s childish sides. The problem with adults is that they look misleadingly adult, so the need for an accurate, corrective reimagining of their inner lives is more unexpected. We need to force ourselves to picture the turmoil, disappointment, worry, and sheer confusion in people who may outwardly appear merely aggressive. Our lover may be tall and able to chair meetings at work, but their behavior may still sometimes be dramatically connected with their early years. We’re so keen never to seem patronizing by treating someone as younger than they are that we overlook the need occasionally to ignore the outward, adult sides of our partner in order to perceive, sympathize with, and assuage the angry, confused infant lurking inside.





LOVE AND EDUCATION


The idea of wanting to change our partners sounds deeply disturbing because, collectively, we have been heavily influenced by a particular aspect of the Romantic conception of love. This states that the principal marker of true affection is the capacity to accept another person in their totality, in all their good and bad sides—and in a sense, particularly their bad sides. To love someone is, according to Romantic philosophy, quite simply to love them as they are, without any wish to alter them. We must embrace the whole person to be worthy of the emotion we claim to feel.

At certain moments of love, it does feel particularly poignant and moving to be loved for things that others have condemned us for or not seen the point of. It can seem the ultimate proof of love that our trickier sides can arouse interest, charity, and even desire. When a partner finds you shy at parties, they don’t laugh; they are sweet and take your tongue-tied state as a sign of sincerity. They’re not embarrassed by your slightly unfashionable clothes because, for them, it’s about honesty and the strength to ignore public opinion. When you have a hangover, they don’t say it was your own fault for drinking too much; they rub your neck, bring you tea, and keep the curtains closed.

But we draw the wrong conclusion from such sweet moments: the idea that loving someone must always mean accepting them in every area, that love is in essence unconditional approval. Any desire for change must, according to this ideology, arouse upset, annoyance, and deep resistance. It seems proof that there can’t be love, that something has gone terribly wrong …

But there is another, more workable and mature philosophy of love available, one that’s traceable back to the ancient Greeks. This states that love is an admiration for the good sides, the perfections, of a person. The Greeks took the view that love is not an obscure emotion. Loving someone is not an odd chemical phenomenon indescribable in words. It just means being awed by another for all the sorts of things about them that truly are right and accomplished.

So, what do we do with what we perceive as their weaknesses, the problems and regrettable aspects? The Greek idea of love turns to a notion to which we desperately need to rehabilitate ourselves: education. For the Greeks, given the scale of our imperfections, part of what it means to deepen love is to want to teach—and to be ready to be taught. Two people should see a relationship as a constant opportunity to improve and be improved. When lovers teach each other uncomfortable truths, they are not abandoning the spirit of love. They are trying to do something very true to genuine love, which is to make their partners more worthy of admiration.

We should stop feeling guilty for simply wanting to change our partners and we should never resent our partners for simply wanting to change us. Both these projects are, in theory, highly legitimate; even necessary. The desire to put one’s lover right is, in fact, utterly loyal to the essential task of love.

Unfortunately, under the sway of Romantic ideology, most of us end up being terrible teachers and equally terrible students. That’s because we rebel against the effort necessary to translate criticism into sensible-sounding lessons and the humility required to hear these lessons as caring attempts to address the more troublesome aspects of our personalities.

Instead, in the student role, at the first sign that the other is adopting a pedagogical tone, we tend to assume that we are being attacked and betrayed, and therefore close our ears to the instruction, reacting with sarcasm and aggression to our “teacher.”

Correspondingly, when there is something we would like to teach, so unsure are we that we’re going to be heard (we develop experience of how these things usually go) or that we have the right to speak, our lessons tend to be expressed in a tone of hysterical annoyance. What might have been an opportunity for a thoughtful lesson will emerge—under the panicky, scared, “classroom” conditions of the average relationship—as a series of shouted, belittling insults met with rebellion and fury.

It’s a paradox of the field that our teaching efforts tend to succeed the less we care that they do so. A sense that everything is at stake and the world is ending—easy enough impressions to reach in relationships when it is late at night and the irritation is large—guarantees to turn us into catastrophic pedagogues.

The good teacher knows that timing is critical to successful instruction. We tend automatically to try to teach a lesson the moment the problem arises, rather than when it is most likely to be attended to (which might be several days later). And so we typically end up addressing the most delicate and complex teaching tasks just at the point when we feel most scared and distressed and our student is most exhausted and nervous. We should learn to proceed like a wily general who knows how to wait for just the right conditions to make a move. We should develop a cult of optimal timing in addressing tricky matters, passing down from generation to generation stories of how, after years of getting nowhere with impulse-driven frontal assaults, a great teacher stood patiently by the dishwasher early in the morning, when everyone was well rested, until their partner had put down the newspaper, reflected on the upcoming holidays and then carefully advanced a long-prepared point, and eventually won a decisive teaching victory.

The defensive have no trust in the benevolence of teachers. There is in their deep minds no distinction between a comment on their behavior and a criticism of their right to exist. Defensiveness raises the cost of disagreement—and thereby dialog—intolerably.

Somewhere in the early years of the defensive person there will have been a sense of grave danger about being in the subordinate position, which would have inspired a flight into claims of hyper-competence. It is the task of all parents to criticize their children and break bad news to them about their wishes and efforts. But there are rather different ways of going about this. The best form of pedagogy leaves the child at once aware of a need to improve and with a sense that they are liked despite their ignorance and flaws. Yet there are also cases where criticism cuts too deep, where the child is left not just corrected but tarred with an impression of utter worthlessness. To recognize without shame and understand sympathetically why one has become excessively defensive are key to unwinding habits of self-protection and therefore to opening oneself up to education and improvement. We needed those defenses once. Now we can afford to let them go.

When teaching and learning fail, we enter the realm of nagging. Nagging is the dispiriting, unpleasant, counterproductive but wholly understandable and poignant version of the noble ambition to improve a lover. There is always so much we might fairly want to change about our partners. We want them to be more self-aware, punctual, generous, reliable, introspective, resilient, communicative, profound … Nagging is, in essence, an attempt at transferring an idea for improvement from one mind to another that has given up hope. It has descended into an attempt to insist rather than invite, to coerce rather than charm.

Lamentably, it doesn’t work. Nagging breeds its evil twin, shirking. The other pretends to read the paper, goes upstairs and feels righteous. The shrillness of one’s tone gives them all the excuse they need to trust that we have nothing kind or true to tell them.

It seems one can change others only when the desire that they evolve has not yet reached an insistent pitch, when we can still bear that they remain as they are. All of us change only when we have a sense that we are understood for the many reasons why change is so hard for us. We know, of course, that the trashcans need our attention, that we should strive to get to bed earlier, and that we have been a disappointment. But we can’t bear to hear these lessons in an unsympathetic tone; tricky children that we are, we want to be indulged for our ambivalence about becoming better people.

The tragedy of nagging is that its causes are usually so noble and yet it doesn’t work. We nag because we feel that our possession of the truth lets us off having to convey it elegantly. It never does. The solution to nagging isn’t to give up trying to get others to do what we want. Rather, it is to recognize that persuasion always needs to be couched in terms that make intuitive sense to those we want to alter.

We should at the same time stop judging faulty attempts at instruction so harshly. Rather than reading every grating lesson as an assault on our whole being, we should take it for what it is: an indication, however flawed, that someone can be bothered, even if they aren’t yet breaking the news perfectly. We should never feel ashamed of instructing or of needing instruction. The only fault is to reject the opportunity for education if it is offered, however clumsily. Love should be a nurturing attempt by two people to reach their full potential, never just a crucible in which to look for endorsement for the panoply of present failings.





2 The Importance of Sex


SEXUAL LIBERATION


We are often given the impression that we live in sexually enlightened times and belong to a liberated age. We ought therefore, by now, to be finding sex a relatively straightforward and untroubling matter. But a narrative of enlightenment ignores the fact that we remain intermittently hugely conflicted, embarrassed, ashamed, and indeed odd about sex, only with one added complication: We are meant to find the matter simple.

In reality, none of us approaches sex as we are meant to, with the cheerful, sporting, non-obsessive, clean, loyal, well-adjusted outlook that we convince ourselves is the norm. We are universally eccentric around sex, but only in relation to some highly and cruelly distorted ideals of normality. Most of what we are sexually remains very frightening to communicate to anyone we would want to think well of us. We may choose to die without having had certain conversations.

The dilemma is how simultaneously to appear normal and yet allow ourselves to be known. That we have to endure such a searing division is a direct legacy of Romanticism, for this movement of ideas blithely insisted that sex could be a beautiful, clean, and natural force utterly in sympathy with the spirit of love. It might be passionate at points, but at heart it was kindly, tender, sweet, and filled with affection for a single person. This sounds charming—and once in a while, for a bit, it is even true. But it woefully neglects some critical components of erotic excitement and can’t help but leave us deeply embarrassed about certain sides of what we want.

To start the list, here are just some of the unpalatable truths that stir in our minds:

■ it’s very rare to maintain sexual interest in only one person, however much one loves them, beyond a certain time;

■ it’s entirely possible to love one’s partner and regularly want to have sex with strangers, frequently types who don’t align with our ordinary concerns;

■ one can be a kind, respectable, and democratic person and at the same time want to inflict or receive very rough treatment;

■ it’s highly normal to have fantasies about scenarios one would not wish to act out in reality and that might involve illegal, violent, hurtful, and unsanitary aspects;

■ it may be easier to be excited by someone one dislikes or thinks nothing of than by someone one loves.



These aren’t just points of mild curiosity. They are fundamentals of the human sexual personality that stand in shocking contrast to everything that society suggests is true.

Despite our best efforts to cleanse it of its peculiarities, sex can’t be normal in the ways we might like it to be. True liberation is a challenge that remains before us as we patiently build up the courage to admit to the nature of our desires and learn to talk to our loved ones and ourselves with a pioneering, unfrightened honesty.





THE MEANING OF SEXUAL EXCITEMENT


Sexual desire makes us want, and do, what are, by the standards of ordinary life, highly peculiar things. We seek to put our mouths in unusual places in other people’s bodies, penetrate implausible orifices and say surprising and uncommon things